---
title: "1.2 Consensus Mechanisms"
date: "2022-01-02"
description: 'Review of Blockchain technology'
---

When it comes to blockchains, which are, in essence, distributed databases, the network's nodes must reach an agreement on the network's current state. This agreement is achieved using consensus mechanisms.

Although consensus mechanisms aren't directly related to building a dapp, understanding them will illuminate concepts relevant to you and your users' experience, like gas prices and transaction times.

## WHAT IS CONSENSUS?

By consensus, we mean that a general agreement has been reached. Consider a group of people going to the cinema. If there is not a disagreement on a proposed choice of film, then a consensus is achieved. In extreme cases, the group will eventually split.

In regards to blockchain, the process is formalized, and reaching consensus means that at least 51% of the nodes on the network agree on the next global state of the network.

## WHAT IS A CONSENSUS MECHANISM?

Consensus mechanisms (also known as consensus protocols or consensus algorithms) allow distributed systems (networks of computers) to work together and stay secure.

For decades, these mechanisms have been used to establish consensus among database nodes, application servers, and other enterprise infrastructure. In recent years, new consensus mechanisms have been invented to allow crypto economic systems, to agree on the state of the network.

A consensus mechanism in a crypto-economic system also helps prevent certain kinds of economic attacks. In theory, an attacker can compromise consensus by controlling 51% of the network. Consensus mechanisms are designed to make this "51% attack" unfeasible. Different mechanisms are engineered to solve this security problem in different ways.

## TYPES OF CONSENSUS MECHANISMS

### Proof-of-work

Ethereum, like Bitcoin, currently uses a proof-of-work (PoW) consensus protocol.

#### Block creation

Proof-of-work is done by miners, who compete to create new blocks full of processed transactions. The winner shares the new block with the rest of the network and earns some freshly minted ETH. The race is won by whoever computer can solve a math puzzle fastest – this produces the cryptographic link between the current block and the block that went before. Solving this puzzle is the work in "proof-of-work".

#### Security

The network is kept secure by the fact that you'd need 51% of the network's computing power to defraud the chain. This would require such huge investments in equipment and energy; you're likely to spend more than you'd gain.

### Proof-of-stake

Ethereum has plans to upgrade to a proof-of-stake (PoS) consensus protocol.

#### Block creation

Proof-of-stake is done by validators who have staked ETH to participate in the system. A validator is chosen at random to create new blocks, share them with the network and earn rewards. Instead of needing to do intense computational work, you simply need to have staked your ETH in the network. This is what incentivizes healthy network behavior.

#### Security

A proof-of-stake system is kept secure by the fact that you'd need 51% of the total staked ETH to defraud the chain. And that your stake is slashed for malicious behavior.

### Proof-of-history

Proof of History is a sequence of computations that can provide a way to cryptographically verify the passage of time between two events. It uses a cryptographically secure function written so that output cannot be predicted from the input, and must be completely executed to generate the output. The function is run in a sequence on a single core, its previous output as the current input, periodically recording the current output, and how many times its been called. The output can then be re-computed and verified by external computers in parallel by checking each sequence segment on a separate core. Data can be timestamped into this sequence by appending the data (or a hash of some data) into the state of the function. The recording of the state, index, and data as it was appended into the sequences provides a timestamp that can guarantee that the data was created sometime before the next hash was generated in the sequence. This design also supports horizontal scaling as multiple generators can synchronize amongst each other by mixing their state into each other's sequences.

#### Block Creation

Fast, reliable synchronization is the biggest reason Solana can achieve such high throughput. Traditional blockchains synchronize on large chunks of transactions called blocks. By synchronizing on blocks, a transaction cannot be processed until a duration, called "block time", has passed. In Proof of Work consensus, these block times need to be very large (~10 minutes) to minimize the odds of multiple validators producing a new valid block at the same time. There's no such constraint in Proof of Stake consensus, but without reliable timestamps, a validator cannot determine the order of incoming blocks. The popular workaround is to tag each block with a wallclock timestamp. Because of clock drift and variance in network latencies, the timestamp is only accurate within an hour or two. To workaround the workaround, these systems lengthen block times to provide reasonable certainty that the median timestamp on each block is always increasing.

Solana takes a very different approach, which it calls Proof of History or PoH. Leader nodes "timestamp" blocks with cryptographic proofs that some duration of time has passed since the last proof. All data hashed into the proof most certainly have occurred before the proof was generated. The node then shares the new block with validator nodes, which can verify those proofs. The blocks can arrive at validators in any order or even could be replayed years later. With such reliable synchronization guarantees, Solana can break blocks into smaller batches of transactions called entries. Entries are streamed to validators in real-time, before any notion of block consensus.

Solana technically never sends a block but uses the term to describe the sequence of entries that validators vote on to achieve confirmation. In that way, Solana's confirmation times can be compared apples to apples to block-based systems. The current implementation sets block time to 800ms.

What's happening under the hood is that entries are streamed to validators as quickly as a leader node can batch a set of valid transactions into an entry. Validators process those entries long before it is time to vote on their validity. By processing the transactions optimistically, there is effectively no delay between the time the last entry is received and the time when the node can vote. In the event consensus is not achieved, a node simply rolls back its state. This optimistic processing technique was introduced in 1981 and is called Optimistic Concurrency Control. It can be applied to blockchain architecture where a cluster votes on a hash that represents the full ledger up to some block height. In Solana, it is implemented trivially using the last entry's PoH hash.

#### Security

A proof-of-stake system is kept secure by the fact that you'd need 51% of the total staked SOL to defraud the chain. And that your stake is slashed for malicious behavior.

## Byzantine Generals Problem

The Byzantine Generals Problem is a game theory problem, which describes the difficulty decentralized parties have in arriving at a consensus without relying on a trusted central party. In a network where no member can verify the identity of other members, how can members collectively agree on a certain truth?

The game theory analogy behind the Byzantine Generals Problem is that several generals are besieging Byzantium. They have surrounded the city, but they must collectively decide when to attack. If all generals attack at the same time, they will win, but if they attack at different times, they will lose. The generals have no secure communication channels with one another because any messages they send or receive may have been intercepted or deceptively sent by Byzantium’s defenders. How can the generals organize to attack at the same time?

Only decentralized systems face the Byzantine Generals problem, as they have no reliable source of information and no way of verifying the information they receive from other members of the network. In centralized systems, an authority is trusted to publish true information and prevent false or fraudulent information from being spread throughout the network.

For example, in the traditional financial system, banks are trusted to show clients their balances and transaction histories in an honest manner. If a bank did attempt to lie or defraud its customers, a central bank or government is trusted to rectify the breach of trust.

Centralized systems do not solve the Byzantine Generals problem, which requires that truth be established trustlessly. Rather, they sacrifice trustlessness for efficiency and choose not to face the problem at all. However, centralized systems are vulnerable to corruption by the central authority.

## Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance(pBFT)

Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance is a consensus algorithm introduced in the late 90s by Barbara Liskov and Miguel Castro. pBFT was designed to work efficiently in asynchronous(no upper bound on when the response to the request will be received) systems. It is optimized for low overhead time. Its goal was to solve many problems associated with already available Byzantine Fault Tolerance solutions. Application areas include distributed computing and blockchain.

pBFT tries to provide a practical Byzantine state machine replication that can work even when malicious nodes are operating in the system.

Nodes in a pBFT enabled distributed system are sequentially ordered with one node being the primary(or the leader node) and others referred to as secondary(or the backup nodes). Note here that any eligible node in the system can become the primary by transitioning from secondary to primary(typically, in the case of a primary node failure). The goal is that all honest nodes help in reaching a consensus regarding the state of the system using the majority rule.

A practical Byzantine Fault Tolerant system can function on the condition that the maximum number of malicious nodes must not be greater than or equal to one-third of all the nodes in the system. As the number of nodes increases, the system becomes more secure.

Solana implements a practical Byzantine fault tolerance, in short pBFT, which is optimized for PoH. The tower BFT uses the PoH as the cryptographic clock to help it reach consensus without having to send a flood of communication between the nodes. This algorithm helps drastically improve the transaction speed. 